Registered No. M-302
L.7646

     

EXTRAORDINAY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

 

ISLAMABAD, THURSDAY, JULY 12, 2007

 

 

PART II
Statutory Notifications (S.R.O.)
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN
PAKISTAN TELECOMMUNICATION AUTHORITY
NOTIFICATION
Islamabad, the 11" July, 2007

S.R.0.692(1)/2007.-In exercise of the powers conferred under clause (0) of sub-section (2)
of Section 5 of the Pakistan Telecommunication (Reorganization) Act, 1996 (Act XVII of 1996)
Pakistan Telecommunication Authority is pleased to make the following Regulations:

PART-I
PRELIMINARY

1. Short Title and Commencement.— (1) [These Regulations shall be called as "Class
Licensing and Registration Regulation 2007"!.

(2) They shall come into force at once.
2. Definitions. — (1) In these Regulations unless there is anything repugnant in the

subject or context, —

! Substituted vide page 121 of S.R.O 56()/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [(i) These regulations shall be called as "Class Vahte Added Services
Licensing and Registration Regulations, 2007"] :
(

(g)

(h)

"Act” means the Pakistan Telecommunication (Re-organization) Act, 1996 (XVII
of 1996);

"Applicant" means any defined class of persons, which applies for a license to
provide Class Value Added Service or Registered Service under these
Regulations;

s
>

["Access Provider" means Local loop Licensee and Mobile Cellular Licensee"|

[‘“(ca) Backhaul” means a portion of the network that comprises of intermediate
links between the content source and a distribution point in small sub networks;"|°

["Broadband" means always on Internet connection with a download speed of at
least 128 kbps connectivity"|4

"Call center" means a centralized telecommunication terminating or originating
office established by a licensee to provide care services for its customers;

"Class License or Class Registration" means any License or Registration Certificate
issued under these Regulations for a class of telecommunication services;

"Data Service" means a telecommunication service that involves electronic transfer
of non-voice content;
[“(ga) "dBi" means decibel isotropic.
b) "dBm" means decibel milliwatt.

&

(gc) "EIRP" means Effective Isotropic Radiated Power.

(gd) "Fixed network operator" means Local Loop (Fixed ,Wireless) and Long
Distance International licensee of PTA"’]*

"Interconnection" shall have the same meaning as assigned in Pakistan
Telecommunication Rules 2000;

["(ha) "Indoor" means a single set of premises in single occupation within a
single unbroken boundary or a vehicle, vessel, aircraft or hovercraft.

(hb) "ISM" means Industrial Scientific and Medical"]°

2Reworded vide page 121 of S.R.O 56(L)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [(c) Access Providers means LDI, LL and Mobile Licensee]
3 Inserted vide page 1045 of S.R.O 287(1)/2016 dated 4" April, 2016

+ Reworded vide page 122 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [(d) Broadband means a communication channel
having speed of 128 kilobit per second or more, capable of carrying a large portion of electromagnetic spectrum and high volumes of data

traffic]

5 Inserted vide page 1046 of S.R.O 287(l)/2016 dated 4 April, 2016

8 Inserted vide page 1046 of S.R.O 287(I)/2016 dated 4" April, 2016
(i) ["License" means for the purpose of these regulations an authorization granted by
the Authority for the provision of any Class of services, or Registration certificate
issued by the Authority for the provision of registered services shall be deemed to
be a license for the purpose of section 20(1) of the Act");

@) "Licensee" means holder of License issued under these Regulations;

(k) "Local Loop (LL) Licensee" means a person licensed under the Act to establish,
maintain and operate a public fixed switched network for the provision of local
exchange telecommunication service, and includes Pakistan Telecommunication
Company Limited, National Telecommunication Corporation and_ licensee
providing service using Wireless in Local Loop;

() "Long Distance and International ( LDI) Licensee" means a person licensed under
the Act to establish, maintain and operate a public fixed switched network for the
provision of nation-wide long distance and international telephony service and
includes Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited and National
Telecommunication Corporation;

(m) "Mobile Cellular Licensee" means a person licensed under the Act to establish,
maintain and operate a public mobile switched network to provide wireless-based
telecommunication service where the terminal equipment may be connected to
the telecommunication system by wireless means and used while in motion, but
excluding a person that is licensed to provide service using Wireless in Local
Loop;

[“(ma) " Node” means a connection point, either a redistribution point or an end
point or both for data transmission.

"(mb) " Non-Interference Basis (NIB)" means a condition of use relative to
other specified uses that affords no protection from harmful interference from the
other specified users, and prohibits causing harmful interference to the other

specified users"]*

(n) "Person" includes both natural and juristic persons;

(o) "Registered Services" means those telecommunication services which do not
require scarce resource;

(p) "Regulation" means these Regulations;

” Substituted vide page 122 of S.R.O 56()/2008 dated 16" January., 2008 [(i) License for the purposes of these Regulations; means an
authorization granted by: the Authority for the provision of anv class of Value Added or Registered Service, Registration Certificate issued by the
Authority for the Registered Services shall be deemed to be a license for the purpose of Section 20(L) of the Act;]

8 Inserted vide page 1046 of S.R.O 287(l)/2016 dated 4" April, 2016
(q) "SMP operator" shall have the same meaning as assigned in Pakistan
Telecommunication Rules 2000;

(r) [Class of Services" means all telecommunication services specified in Schedule E
in addition to those services determined by the Authority from time to time}? and

(s) "Voice service" means a telecommunication service that involves two-way live
human voice in digital form or otherwise, over any public fixed switched network
or between base stations or switches or nodes of any public mobile switched
network;

[“(0" Wi-Fi” means Wireless Fidelity. The technology corresponding to the IEEE
802.11 standards for low power, indoor wireless data communication.

“ (uy) "Wi-Fi Offloading” also known as Mobile traffic offloading is the use of

complementary network technologies for delivering traffic originally targeted for
cellular networks.

“(y) "Wi-Fi node” means node that operate on Wi-Fi technology.

“ (w) "Wi-Fi hot spot” is a Wi-Fi node that is attached to a fixed network and
provides limited mobility access or fixed access"|'°

(2) The words and expressions used but not defined in these [regulations]'' shall have the
same meanings as assigned to them in the Act.

PART-II
LICENSING

2: Open Licensing.- (/) The license or registration under these Regulations for the
[Class of services|'* shall be open, non-discriminatory and non-exclusive; however the
Authority for administrative purposes may fix time slots in a year for receiving and processing
applications.

(2) The decision of grant or refusal of license shall be communicated by the Authority
within 07 working days of receiving of the application in the prescribed form complete in all
respect or closing date of receiving applications, whichever is later.

° Substituted vide page 122 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [(r) Value Added Services" means all telecommunication
services excluding the core telecommunication services of Access Providers as determined by the Authority from time to time,]

10 Inserted vide page 1047 of S.R.O 287()/2016 dated 4" April, 2016

11 Substituted vide page 122 of S.R.0 56(1)/2008 dated 16% January, 2008 [ rules]
Substituted vide page 122 of S.R.0 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [ Value Added Services]
3. Technology Neutral.- All Licenses and Registration Certificates issued under these
Regulations shall be technology neutral.

4. [Category of licensees. Under these regulations, the Authority may issue the
following authorizations for "Class of Services "

(a) Class License for voice services;

(b) Class License for Data services; and

(c) Registration Certificate for Registered Services.]'°

5. Application for grant of license.- /(J) An application for the grant of a license or

registered services to provide a class of services shall be made in the form set out in Schedule 'A'
to these Regulations]'*

(2) An application under sub-regulation (1) shall be made in original and shall be
addressed to the Director General Licensing of the Authority.

(3) An application under sub-rule (1) shall, where applicable, be accompanied by the
documents and details of information set out in Schedule ‘4 ‘check list form’.

(4) An application under [swb-regulation]'° (1) shall be accompanied by the payment
of fees in the amount prescribed under these Regulations in Schedule ‘B’.

(5) An Applicant shall have right to withdraw the application made under sub-
regulation (1) at any time before grant of a license.

6. Grant of license.- (1) The Authority may grant license or Registration Certificate
to any applicant, who fulfills the open, transparent and non-discriminatory eligibility criteria
given by the Authority from time to time.

Q) The Authority shall consider all applications on merits and in determining
whether or not to grant a license or registration certificate, the Authority shall take into account

the following factors, namely:-
(a) financial and economic viability of the applicant;

(b) applicant's experience in telecommunications and relevant past history;

(c) technical competence and experience of applicant's management and key
members of staff and local participation in the business; and

BSubstituted vide page 122 of S.R.O 56()/2008 dated 16th January, 2008 [4. Category of Licensees.—Under these Regulations, the
Authority may issue following authorizations for Value Added Services:

for Voice Value Added Services;
v Data Value Added Services;

gS -ertificate for registered Services]

“Substituted vide page 122 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16 January, 2008 [ (1) An application for the grant of license or Registration
Services to provide Value Added Services shall be made in the form set out in Schedule ‘A’ to these Regulations]
’Substituted/Replaced vide page 123 of S.R.O 56()/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [ "sub-rule"]

     
  

and

 
(d) nature of the services proposed and the viability of the applicant's business plan
including its contribution to the development of the telecommunications sector.

(3) The Authority may reject an application; if it appears that the grant of the License or
Registration Certificate shall threaten or potentially threaten national security.

7. Procedure for grant of a License.- (1) On receipt of an application for grant of
license or Registration Certificate, the Authority shall examine the application and suitability of
grant of License or Registration Certificate.

(2) The Authority shall not reject any application without giving a reasonable
opportunity of being heard. In case the application is incomplete, the Authority may return the
application without rejecting it or may require the applicant to make up the deficiency within
given time.

(3) Incase the Authority decides to reject the application, it shall give detailed reasons
of rejection.

8. Duration and renewal.- (/) Subject to the Act, a Class License shall be granted for
a period of fifteen (15) years and Registration for a period of five (5) years, after the expiry of
the initial term the license shall be renewed on terms and conditions consistent with the policy
of the Federal Government and the Regulations in force at the relevant time.

(2) [The Registration issued by the Authority shall not be renewable.

Provided that a fresh application for Registration may be submitted to the Authority in

accordance with regulation (6), three months prior to completion of the period of five (5)
16

years.|

9. Scarce resource.- /(1)"All licensees shall be entitled to apply for scarce resources
as per the provisions of the Act and applicable regulations, however the Access providers shall
be given preference in allotment or allocation of scarce resources"|""

(2) In case of allocation of scarce resource to the licensee, the Authority may impose
non-discriminatory terms and conditions for utilization of the scarce resource in addition to the
terms and conditions of the license.

[[" (3) Industrial Scientific and Medical (ISM) bands comprising 2.4-2.5 GHz and 5.725-
5.875 GHz may be used free of charge by CVAS Data and Local Loop on Non-
Interference Basis (NIB) with following restrictions on power limits:

‘6"Substituted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [(2) The Registration issued by the Authority shall not be
renewable. Upon completion of the period of five (5) years, a fresh application for Registration mav be submitted to the Authority in accordance with
regulation (6)]

i "Substitute ed vide page 123 of S.R.O 56()/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [ (1) All Licensee excluding holders of Registration
Certificate, shall be entitled to apply for scarce resources as per the provisions of the Act and applicable regulations, however
the Access Providers shall be given preference in the allotment or allocation of scarce resources]

 

 
a) Commercial/non-commercial (Public/Private) use for establishing Wi-Fi
hot spot. Maximum EIRP of 30 dBm for each of the following bands:
i. 2.4-2.5 GHz
il. 5.725 — 5.875 GHz
b) Backhauling of Traffic as referred in Clause 9(5), 9(6) and 9(7) and
establishment of Point to Point Links.
i. 2.4-2.5 GHz
Maximum transmitter output power of 30 dBm with up to 36 dBm
(30 dBm + 6 dBi) of EIRP.
ii. 5.725-5.875 GHz.
Maximum transmitter output power of 30dBm with up to 53 dBm (30 dBm
+ 23 dBi) of EIRP]'®.]'°

['@ No license shall be required for indoor private (non-commercial) use.

(5) Backhaul for public Wi-Fi hot spot shall be provided by a fixed network operator
where such services are available.

(6) Mobile Operators wishing to provide public fixed or limited mobility Wi-Fi services
to their own customers shall do so under commercial arrangement with fixed
network operator.

(7) Mobile Licensee can undertake Wi-Fi offloading of mobile traffic to a Wi-Fi node
linked to a mobile network or to a Wi-Fi hot spot linked to a fixed network.

(8) Wi-Fi node linked to a mobile network shall be used to provide offloading of mobile
traffic only from its own subscribers and from those that are roaming on its own
network.

(9) Details of outdoor links will be registered with FAB through PTA prior to
commencement of service for record purposes.

(10) PTA may inspect the site and obtain necessary information as and when required

(11) Wi-Fi hotspot owners shall be responsible to ensure that their services are
compliant to all relevant laws of the country specifically the national security
requirements; and PTA's, other relevant Regulations, SOPs and Directives.

(12) PTA may order closure of Wi-Fi hotspot(s), Wi-Fi Node(s) or link(s) either
permanently or temporarily for security reasons, on violation of the rules,
regulations, SoPs or PTA's directives and/or on the policy directives of the

Government of Pakistan "7?

'’ Inserted vide page 4055 of S.R.O.1114(1)/ 2008 dated 27" October, 2008.

19 Substituted vide page 1047 of S.R.O 287(I)/2016 dated 4" April,2016[(3)Among the scarce resources, spectrum comprising of
Industrial Scientific and Medical (ISM) bands i.e., 2473.5-2483 MHz,5725-5875 MHz and 24- 24.25GHz may be used free of
charges by Class Data licensees with maximum permissible EIRP 100 mili-watts / 20 dBm per site and maximum permissible
distance 100 meters per hop for provisioning of data communication services. Use of ISM bands for providing any
telecommunication service to general public by a non-licensing or any licensee other than Class Data Licensees is illegal]

” Inserted vide page 1048 of S.R.O 287(1)/2016 dated 4" April, 2016
PART-II
FEES

10. Initial fees.- (1) The applicant shall pay the [xxx]!initial license fee and
processing fee to the Authority in the prescribed manner with the application.

(2) The Authority shall return the initial license fee of the unsuccessful applicant within
seven (07) days of the rejection of the application.

11. Annual Fee.- /(/) The Licensee shall pay the annual license fee to the Authority,
calculated on the basis of percentage of the Licensee's annual gross revenue from Licensed
Services for the most recently completed Financial Year minus Inter-operator payments from
the effective date of the license [as decided by the Authority from time to time.

Provided further that annual charges shall be payable for subsequent years.}*

(2) In case the License is for personal use, the Licensee shall pay a flat annual fee of
Rs.5000 per annum to the Authority.

(3) There shall be no annual fee for Registered Services.

(4) The Licensee shall pay the annual fee to the Authority within 120 days of the end
of the Financial Year to which such fee relate and shall submit the audited financial statements
in support of its calculations of annual fee and contributions payable. The Authority shall have
the right to audit such statements at any time.

(5) In addition to any other remedies available to the Authority, late payment fee shall
incur an additional fee calculated at the rate of 2% per month on the outstanding amount, for
every day or part thereof from the due date until paid.

12. Other fees.- (/) All fees for the scarce resources including short codes shall be
paid by the Licensee to the Authority as per applicable Regulations, auction benchmark or
determination.

(2) The Licensee shall also promptly pay to the Authority all fees required to be paid
under the Act, Rules and Regulations.

13. USF Contribution.- There shall be no condition in the licenses and registration
certificates issued under these Regulations to make contribution to the Universal Service Fund.

2! Omitted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16 January, 2008 [ "Appropriate"]

22 Re-worded vide page 123 of S.R.O 56())/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [ (1) The licensee shall pay the annual license fee to the
Authority, calculated on the basis of percentage of the Licensee's annual gross revenue from Licensed Services for the most
recently completed Financial Year minus Inter-operator payments from the effective date of the license. Provided further that
annual charges shall be pavable for subsequent years]
14. R&D Contribution.- There shall be no condition in the licenses and registration
certificates issued under these Regulations to make contribution to the Research and
Development Fund.

15. Payment Mode.- (J) All fees shall be paid by the Licensees by depositing in the
designated accounts of the Authority or by any other mode prescribed by the Authority from
time to time.

(2) The Licensee shall also inform the Authority about the payment made through the
Director Licensing.

PART-IV
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF LICENSEES

16. _ Rights granted to licensee.- (/) A licensee shall have the right to establish, maintain
and operate a telecommunication system excluding its own Public Switched Network in the
licensed territory and for the period stipulated by the Authority in the License, in accordance
with the provisions of the Act [Ru/es/** and these Regulations.

(2) A licensee shall have the right to provide Licensed class of [xxxx]*Services
mentioned in Schedule 'E' in the licensed territory and for the period stipulated by the Authority
in the License in accordance with the provisions of the Act and these Regulations.

17. Conditions of license.- (1) A license granted under these Regulations shall be subject
to the Act, Rules and Regulations framed thereunder and these Regulations.

(2) A license granted in accordance with the provisions of the Act and these
Regulations shall be subject to the restrictions on transfer of the license and on change of
ownership of the licensee and such further restrictions as are contained in Rule 11 of the
Pakistan Telecommunication Rules 2000.

(3) A license granted in accordance with the provisions of the Act and these
Regulations shall be subject to the conditions applying to all licensed services contained in
[SCHEDULE-E}**to these Regulations or such other conditions as the Authority may establish
from time to time not inconsistence with the provisions of these Regulations and the Act.

[17(A) The licensee shall be obliged to commence any licensed services within one year
fiom the date of grant of license:

3 Inserted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56()/2008 dated 16" January, 2008
2’ Omitted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56(l)/2008 dated 16 January, 2008 [ "Value Added"]
5 Substituted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56 ()/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [Schedule 'F']
 

10

Provided that licensees duly authorized to provide more than one licensed service in
their license shall be required to obtain a commencement certificate for all class licensed
services separately in accordance with sub-regulation A (ti) of regulation 17 as provided below.

17(A) (i) The licensee shall not provide any licensed services, within a period as
required in regulation 17 (A) above, to a customer, or accept any payment from a customer in
respect of the Licensed Services to be provided by the licensee, unless a commencement
certificate is issued for each licensed services by the Authority certifying that the licensee has
established the required telecom system under the provision of the license and is able to provide
licensed services.

17 (A) (ii) The licensees shall give 30 days prior notice to the Authority of the date on
which the licensee intends to commence providing any licensed services to customer. The
licensee shall co-operate with the Authority in its scrutiny and investigation of its
Telecommunication System and the Licensed Services in connection with the issuance of a
commencement certificate.

Provided that if the current licensees have commenced their licensed services without
obtaining a commencement certificate are required to obtain the commencement certificate
afresh for provision of licensed services within thirty (30) days from the date of gazette
notification of these regulations:

Provided further that if the current licensees have not yet commenced their licensed
services they are required to obtain commencement certificate within six months (06) from the
date of gazette notification of these regulations.

17(A) (iii) A licensee may apply to the Authority for extension in the required date of
commencement of services, only in exceptional circumstances:

Provided that the application of the licensee for grant of extension in the date of
commencement under these regulations may only be considered by the Authority if deemed
appropriate, and the decision of the Authority shall be final and binding.

17 (A) (iv) The Authority may prescribe its procedures / SOPs for issuance of
commencement certificate in accordance with the nature/type of licensed services]*°

18. Exception to license obligation.- (/) Licensee of Data Services and Registered
Services shall be entitled to establish Call Center to serve their respective customers irrespective
of the fact that their licenses are not for voice service.

°6 Inserted vide page 897 of S.R.O 295()/2010 dated 3" Mav, 2010.
11

PART-V
MISCELLANEOUS

19. Addition of New Services.- (1) The Authority shall have the power to add new
services to the classes of [xxxx]’’ services mentioned in Schedule 'E' and upon such addition the
Licensee of that class of [xxxx]?* services shall be entitled to offer that service without any
formal authorization.

(2) In case a licensee wants to provide any service which although falls in the category
its class license but does not find mention in Schedule 'E' it shall seek prior approval of the

Authority before offering such service.

20. Tariff Regulation.- The tariff of the Licensee shall not be regulated till it attains
the status of SMP as described in the Pakistan Telecommunication Rules 2000.

21. Interconnection.- (/) All Licensees having license under these Regulations shall
have the right to request interconnection to all or any Access Provider on reasonable terms and
conditions.

(2) In case of refusal by an Access Provider the Licensee may invoke the jurisdiction
of the Authority, which shall decide the matter after hearing the Parties.

(3) The Interconnection between the Telecommunication System of the Licensee and
the Telecommunication Systems of other Licensees and Access Providers shall be governed by
the Pakistan Telecommunication Rules, 2000 and the Interconnection Guidelines issued by the
Authority from time to time.

22. Existing licensees.- All existing licensees excluding Access Providers and
Infrastructure Licensees may request the Authority to convert their existing licenses free of cost
to the comparable category of class license for the remaining period, if the initial fee earlier paid
by them is more than the initial fee for the requested category.

(2) In case already paid fee was less then the initial fee prescribed under these
Regulations then the Licensee shall pay the difference as per the following formula:

The initial fee already paid by the Licensee shall be divided into total number of years.
The initial fee prescribed under these Regulations shall be divided into fifteen 15 years
and per year amount already paid will be subtracted from the Initial fee prescribed under
these regulation for each year. The Licensee shall pay the difference for the remaining
years of his previous license.

23. — Repeal.- Following Regulations are hereby repealed:

2’ Omitted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56(i)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [ "Value Added]
28 Omitted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56(i)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [ "Value Added]
 

12

a) Amateur Radio Regulations 2004;

b) Audiotex Service Regulations 2004;

c) Burglar Alarm Service Regulations 2004;

d) Card Payphone service Regulations, 2004;

e) Non-voice Communication Network Service Regulations, 2004;
f) Registration of Satellite Service Providers Regulations 2004;

g) Trunk Radio Services Regulations 2004; and

h) Vehicle Tracking Service Regulations 2004.

Schedule A
[Forms for License and Registration for class of services|”?

Application No (to be filled by PTA)

 

[ [ | [| [ J J 1

Application Form
I,_—————_ certify that I am the authorized representative of M/s——————., hereinafter
called 'The Company’, and is legally authorized to sign for and on behalf of The Company and
that all the statements made are true and correct to the best of my knowledge.

1. On behalf of the company I would like to apply for a <License/Registration for
Class of [xxx]? service.

2. [have completed all prerequisites.

I understand that the submission of this proposal does not automatically qualify

my company for award of a Class of [xxx]°! Service <license/ registration> by

Pakistan Telecommunication Authority.

Ww

Full Name (give comma after every word)

 

 

 

Postal address

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Identity card no.

2° Substituted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January,2008 [Forms for License & Registration of Value
Added Services"]

” Omitted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January,2008 [" Value Added"]

1 Omitted vide page 123 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January,2008[" Value Added").
13

 

L

PT] Toy - ]

Telenhone (in Comnanv's name):

Email:
Signature:
Name:

TTT TT T= TT Position

Fax:

[APPLICANT PROFILE]**
(To be submitted with the application form)

1. Company details
1.1 Name of company

 

 

 

1.2 Postal address

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Telephone: Fax: Email:
1.3 Registered office address

Telephone: Fax: Email:
2. Contact Information

2.1 Name of contact person

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2. Designation:

23 Computerized National Identity Card number:

 

. Fax:

. Email

 

Telephone:.

Cell phone no.

Passport no. (Foreigners only)

82 Substituted vide page 124 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January,2008 [At any time in future, if any of the above
mentioned information changes, the applicant's official representative(s) mentioned above or any one of the shareholder
director will be liable to submit the same to PTA licensing division.]
 

14

Application No.(to be filled by PTA)

 

 

[CHECK LIST FORM
(To Be Submitted With The Application)

 

S.No

Items

Check (\) if
attached

#of Pages

PTA use
Only

 

Category Form;

 

wn ™

Applicant(s) profile;

 

Evaluation Fee; Submit proof of deposit

 

SN

Certificate of Incorporation (including Memorandum
& Article of Association and Form- 29 duly certified by
SECP)

 

a. Attested Copies of Computerized National
Identity Card for — Pakistani national
shareholder directors.

b. Attested copies of Passports of foreign

nationals submitted through Ministry of

Foreign Affairs after security clearances.

 

Undertaking on duly notarized stamp paper for:

a. That the Company or its Directors have never been
declared insolvent by any court of law.

b. b. That the Directors of the company have never
been convicted by a court of law for major offences
or unethical/ immoral turpitude (other than minor
offences).

c. That neither the applicant Company nor its
shareholder directors are defaulter(s) of PTA.

 

Bio-data of key management personnel

 

Brief Description of the Applicant's Business Plan
Including Bank statement in the name of the company,
3 to 5 years business plan (projected balance sheet,
profit and lost account, cash flow statement, project
cost,)

 

Network Plan

 

 

70.

 

Copy of proposed Service Level Agreements with the
Access / Infrastructure Provider/ customers.

 

 

 

 

 
15

Note: On satisfactory completion of the above stated formalities by the applicant,
PTA will issue the Class Value Added Service Licenses (CVAS) within 07 davs.

A Defaulter of PTA can't apply for a new Registration or CVALS of any type. The
shareholders of the defaulter company cannot have ownership of any amount in

the new company applying for any telecom service}*

8 Substituted vide page 124 of S.R.O 56())/2008 dated 16" January,2008[CHECK LIST FORM

(TO BE SUBMITTED WITH THE APPLICATION)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

S.No Items Check iw) if #of Pages PTA use
attached Only
I Category Form;see ‘CVALS cat (1.0)Form-B
2 Applicant(s) profile; see ‘CVALS pf1(1.0)Form-C
3; Evaluation Fee; see ‘CVALS fee (1.0)doc-E’ Submit proof of deposit
4. Certificate of Incorporation (including Memorandum & Article of
Association and Form- 29 duly certified by SECP)
D. a. Attested Copies of Computerized National Identity Card
for Pakistani national shareholder directors.
b. Attested copies of Passports of foreign nationals
submitted through Ministry of Foreign Affairs after security
clearances.
6. Undertaking on duly notarized stamp paper for:
a. That the Company or its Directors have never been declared
insolvent by any court of law.
b. That the Directors of the company have never been convicted by a
court of law for major offences or unethical/ immoral turpitude
(other than minor offences).
c. That neither the applicant Company nor its shareholder directors are
defaulter(s) of PTA.
7. Bio-data of kev management personnel
8. Brief Description of the Applicant's Business Plan Including Bank
statement in the name of the company, 3 to 5 years business plan
(projected balance sheet, profit and lost account, cash flow statement,
project cost.)
9. Network Plan
10. Copy of proposed Service Level Agreements with the Access /

 

Infrastructure Provider/ customers.

 

 

 

 

Note: On satisfactory completion of the above stated formalities by the applicant, PTA will issue the Class
Value Added Service Licenses (CVAS) within 07 days.

A Defaulter of PTA can't apply for a new Registration or CVALS of any type. The shareholders of the defaulter company cannot

have ownership of any amount in the new company applving for anv telecom service]

 
16

Application No. (to be filled by PTA)

 

[ J | [| J J- 7 7

Category Selection Form
(Please fill items I through III below & submit with the application)

I. Commercial 0 or Not-For-Prof it 0

IL. Type of License or Registration (choose any one)

Data Class [xxxx}4 License Service

[Data rate: ANY]
[Services: [Any number of service types]}*>, through PTA licensed operators, may

be chosen. In future, relevant additions to the services may be made by the

Authority from time to time

Voice Class [xxxP° License Service
[Voice only services]*’, through PTA licensed operators

Class [xxx]’*Registered Service®?

IIL. Province(s) selected*® (check as many as desired)

Baluchistan Oo NWFP a

Sindh a Punjab Qo
Or

Nationwide Q

4 Omitted vide page 125 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16 January.2008 [" Value Added"]

> Vehicle Tracking, Data Service, Internet Service or as added by the Authority from time to time.

© Omitted vide page 125 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January,2008["Value Added"]

*” Payphone and Premium Rate Services or any other related service, which may be added by the Authority from time
to time.

38 Omitted vide page 125 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January,2008 ["Value Added"] Value Added

*” Registered Services include: Video Conferencing; Voice Mail; SMS Aggregator; Content Service Provider; or any — other
related service as added by the Authority from time to time.

” Selection desired for licensed value added services only. All registrations are for nationwide services.

 
17

Schedule B

License Fee Framework

License Processing Fee (non-refundable): Rs. 5,500

Initial License Fee

Class License Commercial Use Own Use
[CL]*per Province” Rs.100,000 Rs. 50,000
[CL]*® (Nationwide) Rs.300,000 Rs.150,000

Registration Processing Fee (non-refundable): Rs. 10,000

Registration Registration Fee
For 5 years only 10,000
SCHEDULE E
[Class of Services]
1. Voice

(a) Card Payphone Service
(b) Premium Rate Service
(c) [Trunk Radio]**

2 Data
(a) Internet Service
(b) Data service
(c) Vehicle tracking System

3. Registered Services
(a) Voice Mail
(b) SMS Aggregator
(c) Video Conferencing
(d) Content Service Provider
(ce) [Amateur Radio]*°

4! Substituted vide page 126 of S.R.O 56(l)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 ["CVALS"]

* 50% less for Baluchistan.

Substituted vide page 126 of S.R.O 56())/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 ["CVALS"]

“ Substituted vide page 126 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 ["Value Added"]
* Inserted vide page 127 of S.R.O 56())/2008 dated 16" January, 2008.

Inserted vide page 127 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008.
18

Schedule F/I
Registration No.— Date————
Registration Certificate of
[Class of Registered Services\""

The Pakistan Telecommunication Authority is pleased to register M/S <——— name———— > of
<—_____ address > for providing Class [xxxx]** Registered service as
mentioned in "Class [xxxx]*” Services Licensing and Registration Regulations 2007" to:

a. Extend services to all, in a non-exclusive manner, free of all discriminations;

b. Abstain from providing any telecom service without obtaining prior license;

c. Promptly provide all information, as and when desired by the Authority, which helps it
to quantify proliferation of the technologies or services whether technical, regulatory or
financial in nature;

2. This registration is valid for a maximum period of five (5) years from its last registration.
[In case licensee wants to continue the licensed operation beyond five(5S) years, a fresh
application for registration may be submitted to the Authority in accordance with

regulation(6) three months prior to the completion of the expiry of the five years period.]°°
3. M/S <———— name—————— > shall provide the Registered Services in accordance
and in compliance with the laws of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
4. M/S <—————  name-———_ > shall, in the course of provision of Registered

Services, comply with the provisions of the Pakistan Telecommunication (Reorganization)
Act 1996, Rules and Regulations framed thereunder and directions of the Authority, which
may be issued from time to time.

5. Where the provisions of this Registration Certificate are silent or ambiguous, on any issue
irrespective of its nature, Authority's decision shall be final and binding.

(for & on behalf of the Authority)

< Applicants name > <_ Name of the DG >
< Applicants title > Director General <WIn or Wls>
<_ Applicants address > P.T.A. Headquarters

” Substituted vide page 127 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 ["Class Value Added Registered Services"]

+ Omitted vide page 127 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [Value Added:]

#° Omitted vide page 127 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 [’Value Added!']

” Substituted vide page 128 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008 One (1) month prior notice to the Authority is required
for renewal of this Registration.
 

19

Schedule F/2
PAKISTAN TELECOMMUNICATION AUTHORITY

PTA Headquarters Building, F-5/I Islamabad, Pakistan
www.pta.gov.pk

License No. < > Dated: < >

LICENCE TO ESTABLISH, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE
TYPE <Voice or Data> [Class License}*!

In exercise of the powers conferred by section 5 of Pakistan Telecommunication
(Reorganization) Act, 1996 (hereinafter called the "Act"), the Pakistan Telecommunication
Authority (hereinafter called Authority), hereby, grants non-exclusive license to M/S <
name> Address > (hereinafter called the "Licensee") to establish, maintain
and operate [Class of services], as mentioned above, on terms and conditions[Annexed to this
license;|> provisions of existing enactments, including rules and regulations made thereunder
and amendments/modifications made thereto together with new enactment as may be considered
expedient and necessary from time to time.

This License shall come into force on the date of issuance and shall be valid for the
period of fifteen years duration subject to payment of such fee(s) as the Authority may specify
from time to time.

This license may be renewed for another term(s) beyond fifteen years on thirty months prior
written request of the licensee before expiry of the existing term of the license subject to the
terms and conditions applicable at that time.

(For and on behalf of the Authority)

 

<_Applicants name >

<_ Name of the DG >
< Applicants title > Director General <WIn or WIs>
< Applicants address > P.T.A. Headquarters, Islamabad

5! Substituted vide page 128 of S.R.O 56()/2008 dated 16" January., 2008 ["Value Added Services"']
% Substituted vide page 129 of S.R.O 56()/2008 dated 16" January., 2008 ["Value Added Services"]
3 Substinuted vide page 129 of S.R.O 56(1)/2008 dated 16" January, 2008[contained in annexure-L.]

   
