BEFORE THE HONOURABLE PAKISTAN COMMISSION ON
ACCESS TO INFORMATION

Appeal No. /2019

Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani, s/o ee. r/o 59-A, ae

.. Appellant

Versus

1. Department of Stationary and Forms through its Deputy Controller, Office of
the Deputy Controller, Stationary & Forms, University Road, Karachi, Pakistan.

2. Department of Stationary and Forms through its Assistant Controller
(Publication), Muhammad Akram Mast, Office of the Deputy Controller,
Stationary & Forms, University Road, Karachi, Pakistan.

... Respondents

 

APPEAL UNDER SECTION 170.) OF THE RIGHT OF ACCESS TO

INFORMATION ACT, 2017, READ WITH ARTICLE 19A OF
CONSTITUTION OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN

 
Respectfully Sheweth,

1.

That the titles and addresses of the parties in the title of this Appeal are sufficient for the

purposes of service of summons on the Parties.

That the Appellant, namely Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani, is a private citizen of
Pakistan. He is a software developer, entrepreneur and computer programmer who also
authors technical content, contributes to open source projects, has founded and led

companies in Pakistan and raised venture capital in Silicon Valley.

That, on 23.10.2019, the Appellant wrote to the Respondent No. 1 via post, and
requested certain information, which information falls within the ambit of record under
the Act of 2017. As per Section 11 of the Act of 2011, this amounted to a formal request

under the law. A copy of this request is annexed herewith as Annexure A.

That the request prayed for the provision of “all published copies of the Gazette of
Pakistan in possession of the Department of Stationary & Forms”. This information is of
public importance because it concerns published notifications, rules, regulations, and
laws of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and notwithstanding the fact that under the law,
no reason for seeking information need be provided, and the Appellant, as a citizen of
Pakistan, is entitled to this information as it concerns his, and every Pakistani’s, very way
of life. It is also not the case that the information in question falls in any category

excluded by the Act of 2017 law from this process.

That the request specifically requested that Respondent No. 1 “/p/lease ensure that the
records ... [where possible, are delivered in a digital format to save time and delivery

costs”
6. That the request quoted Section 14 of the Act of 2017, politely informing Respondent No.
1 that ‘this letter [the request] is sufficient for a request under the Right of Access to
Information Act, 2017 and, therefore, your [Respondent No. 1’s] organization is
“required to respond to a request as soon as possible and in any case within ten working

I99

days of receipt of the request.

7. That the request was delivered on 24.10.2019 and received by “RAZI°” at the offices of
Respondent No. 1. A copy of the registered receipt and proof of delivery is annexed

herewith as Annexure B.

8. That the Respondent No. 1 was legally required to intimate to the Appellant the receipt
of the request, and to process with the same within ten working days as per the provisions
of the Act of 2017, as well as any regulations laid by this Honourable Information

Commission in the exercise of its powers under the provisions of the same Act of 2017.

9. That the response of the Respondent No. 2 was dated 11.11.2019, which is twelve (12)
working days from the date of receipt of the request, and a full two (2) working days over
the prescribed time limit in Section 14 of the Act of 2017. Furthermore, it was
perfunctory, inadequate and wholly illegal; being ultra vires Article 19A of the
Constitution as well as the Act of 2017. The copies of the said reply are attached
herewith as Annexure C. It is submitted for the abundance of clarity that following the
said response, no further communication has been forthcoming from the Respondent No.
2, which amounts to a further breach of the Act of 2017. The Appellant has been
provided a statutory remedy against such non-compliance by Governmental Agencies by
virtue of Section 17 of the Act of 2017, in the shape of an Appeal to this Honourable

Information Commission.
10.

11.

12.

13.

That, consequently, the Appellant, in accordance with Section 17 of the Act of 2017, has
filed this Appeal to this Pakistan Commission on Access to Information established in
accordance with Section 18 of the Act of 2017, against Respondent No. 2 for failure to

perform its statutory duty under the Act of 2017.

That the instant Appeal is based on, inter alia, Article 19-A to Part II - Chapter 1
(Fundamental Rights). Article 19-A is reproduced below:

“Right to information:

Every citizen shall have the right to have access to information in all matters of public

J

importance subject to regulation and reasonable restrictions imposed by law.’

That, additionally, the case of the Appellant is governed by Article 8, which stipulates
that “Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of fundamental rights [are] to be void” and

the right of the Appellant under Article 4 “to be dealt with in accordance with law, etc.”.

That the Appellant also wishes to place specific reliance on The Right of Access to
Information Act, 2017. The Preamble of which states that:

“WHEREAS Government believes in transparency and the right to have access to
information to ensure that the people of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan have
improved access to records held by public authorities and promote the purposes
of making the Government more accountable to its people, of improving
participation by the people in public affairs, of reducing corruption and
inefficiency in Government, of promoting sound economic growth, of promoting

good governance and respect for human rights;

AND WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for a law which gives effect to the
fundamental right of access to information, as guaranteed under Article 19A of
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and international law,
whereby everyone shall have the right to have access to all information held by
public bodies subject only to reasonable restrictions imposed by law, and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto;”’ the Access to Information

Act, 2017 is being enacted.
14. That for the purposes of the instant Appeal, certain provisions of the Act of 2017 are
particularly relevant and therefore the same are being reproduced herein-under for ease of
reference:

Section 2.
Definitions

(ii) "applicant" means a citizen of Pakistan, as defined in law, who lodges a request or
any person who is acting for or on behalf of such a person;

(iv) "Information Commission" means the Pakistan Commission on Access to
Information established in accordance with section 18

(v) "information" means information based on record;

(ix) "public body" means—

(a) any Ministry, Division, attached department or subordinate
Office, including autonomous bodies of the Federal Government;

(b) any Federal and any municipal or local authority set up or established by or
under any Federal law:

(c) the National Assembly and the Senate including their secretariats committees
and members;

(d) any statutory corporation or other body corporate or institution set up or
established or owned or controlled or funded by the Federal Government

(e) any court, tribunal, commission or board under the Federal law;

(d) any incorporated or unincorporated body of the Federal Government
functioning under the control or authority of another public body or
wherein one or more public bodies own or have controlling interest or
provide substantial funding;

(g) any other organisation which undertakes a public function to the extent of that
function; and

(h) a non-governmental organisation which directly or indirectly receives or has
received public funds, subsidy, tax exemption, piece of land or any other
benefit involving public funds and any other non-governmental
organisation or body registered under any law for the time being in force;

Section 3.
Right to have access to information not to be denied -
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, no applicant shall be denied access to
information or record held by a public body.

(2) This Act shall be interpreted so as to advance its purposes as set out in the preamble
and to-
(a) promote the right of access to information; and
(b) facilitate and encourage promptly the disclosure of the information at the
lowest and reasonable cost.
Section 6.
Declaration of public record —
Subject to the provisions of section 7, the following record of all public bodies is hereby
declared to be the public record, namely:
(a) policies and guidelines
(b) transactions involving acquisition and disposal of property and
expenditure undertaken by a public body in the performance of its
duties and functions;
(c) information regarding grant of licences, allotments and other benefits,
privileges, contracts and agreements made by a public body
(d) final orders and decisions, including decisions relating to members of
public; and

Section 11.
Requests —
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made there under a citizen of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan may make a request to a public body through the
designated official.

(2) A request under sub-section (1) shall be in writing and made in any manner in which
the public body has the facilities to receive it, including in person, by mail, fax,
online or e-mail.

(3) Any written request which identifies the information or record sought in sufficient
detail to enable the public body to locate it, and which includes a complete
address and contact details for delivery of the information or record, shall be
treated as a request.

(4) Subject to sub-section (3), a public body may provide a prescribed form for making
requests.

(5) In no case shall an applicant be required to provide reasons for his request.

Section 13.
Procedure for acceptance and refusal of requests —
(1) The designated official shall provide a written acknowledgement in response to a
request.

(2) The designated official shall process the request and by notice in writing inform the
applicant that-

(a) the request has been acknowledged and the applicant is entitled to receive the

information or record, subject to the payment of prescribed fee. On

payment of the fee the designated official shall provide the requested

record; or
(b) the request has been rejected-

(i) on the basis that it does not comply with the provisions of this Act and
the rules made thereunder but only after requisite assistance has
been offered to the applicant as mentioned in sub-section (2) of
section 10;

(ii) on the basis that the information is already available in a generally
accessible form in which case the notice shall indicate to the
applicant the place from where the information may be found;

(iii) on the basis that it is incorrect, because it relates to information
which is substantially the same information that has already been
provided to the same applicant during last six months; or

(iv) in whole or in part, on the basis that the information is exempt subject
to section 7(f), in which case the notice shall specify the exact
exception relied upon and specifying details regarding the right of
the applicant to appeal against this decision.

(3) Where information or a record is provided in accordance with clause (a) of
sub-section (2), it shall be accompanied by a certificate which may be
affixed to the information or record at the foot thereof, or as appropriate,
to the effect that the information is correct or, as the case may be, the copy
is a true copy of the original record and such certificate shall be dated
and signed by the designated official.

(4) Where the designated official refuses a request, he shall, before informing the

applicant of such refusal, obtain written approval of the principal officer
of the public body.

Section 14.
Time limit for responding —
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a public body shall be required to
respond to a request as soon as possible and in any case within ten
working days of receipt of the request.

(2) The period stipulated in sub-section (1) may be extended by maximum of
further ten working days where it is necessary when the request requires a
search through a large number of records or records located in different

offices or consultation is required with third parties or other public
bodies.

(3) Information needed to protect the life and liberty of any individual shall be
provided within three working days.
Section 15.
Fee for requests —
Prescribed fee may be charged for the cost of reproducing information and
sending it to the applicant
Section 17.
Appeal —

(1) An applicant who is not satisfied by decision of the designated official or
anywhere no decision has been communicated to him within the time fixed for
such decision, he may, within a period not exceeding thirty days after either
receiving a decision or after the time-limit for such a decision has passed,
prefer an appeal to the Information Commission.

(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be free of charge

(3) The information Commission established under section 18 shall decide an
appeal under sub-section (1) within a period of sixty days.

(4) The public body shall, in an appeal under sub-section (1), bear the burden of
proof of showing that it acted in accordance with the provisions of this
Section 25.
Act to override other laws —
The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Section 27.
Power to make regulations —
The Information Commission may make regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of the rules made under section 26, regarding its internal procedures
and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it may make regulations
regarding—
(a) record management standards; and
(b) fee that may be charged for requests; and
(c) procedure for processing of appeals.

15. That in an exercise of the powers conferred upon this Honorable Information
Commission, a schedule of costs was notified, an official press-release issued by the
Press Information Department of the Federal Government on 27.08.2019 is reproduced
herein-under:

Federal public bodies are now legally bound to provide free of cost first ten pages
of the information requested under the Right of Access to Information Act
2017 and only rupees two per page will be charged for every extra page by
a public body. Federal public bodies will now only charge actual cost of cd,
diskette, floppy, cassette, video or any other electronic device as determined
on the basis of official procurement record. Pakistan Information

Commission has notified Schedule of costs in exercise of the powers
conferred by Section 27 (b) of the Right of Access to Information Act 2017
(XXXIV of 2017). This Schedule of costs will be applicable to all Federal
Ministries, attached Departments, Divisions, Autonomous bodies, statutory
bodies established under any Federal Law, Courts, Commissions, Tribunals,
National Assembly, Senate of Pakistan, Prime Minister Office and any
board, Commission, Council or other body substantially financed by the
Government. This Schedule of costs will also be applicable to special
institutions, companies of the Government and NGOs that are substantially
financed by the Government. In a statement issued by Chief Information
Commissioner, citizens will be no longer required to first deposit fee for
filing Information under the Schedule of Cost notified by the Commission.
Previously, citizens were required to deposit Rs.50 at the time of submitting
an information request to a Federal Public body under Freedom of
Information Rules 2004 which was great hinderance in the exercise of the
right of access to information in matters of public importance as guaranteed

by Article 19-A of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan.

16. In light of the above-quoted regulations and provisions of law, the instant Appeal is based

on, inter alia, the following:

GROUNDS

(1) That the Appellant has satisfied all the requirements of the Act of 2017, in
respect of his request because he is (I) a citizen of Pakistan as required by Section
2(ii) of the Act of 2017, (II) the information he has requested falls within the
definition of information as per Section 2 (v) of the Act of 2017 as well as the

definition of Public Record under Section 6 (a) and Section 6 (d) of the Act of
2017, (III) the Request by the Appellant was fully consonant with the
requirements of Section 11 of the Act of 2017, (IV) the response of the
Respondent No. 2 was in violation of Section 13 of the Act of 2017, (V) the
response of the Respondent No. 2 was in violation of Section 15 of the Act of
2017, and (VI) the time limit under Section 14 of the Act of 2017 for responding

to the said Request has expired.

(II) That the Response of the Respondent No. 2 is clearly ultra vires the Act of
2017, as the record sought was not produced, Respondent No. 2 has requested a
sum of money beyond the prescribed fee notified by this Honourable Information
Commission, and as Respondent No. 2 has requested that the Appellant
“ascertain your [the Appellant’s] requisite Gazettes’, knowing full well that the
Appellant had, in the initial request, described the information requested in

sufficient detail to enable Respondent No. 2 to locate it.

(Ill) That the Appellant has a right to be treated in accordance with the law as per
Article 4 of the Constitution of Pakistan. The Respondent No. 2 is an attached
department of the Cabinet Division, established as a Service Department, as
defined under Article 59-A of Accounts Code Volume I. Its functions are printing,
stocking and distribution of civil standard forms, as well as stocking and sale of
official publications and gazettes and as such it is fully covered by the provisions
of the Act of 2017. The Appellant made a request to the Respondent No. 2 in a
manner prescribed under the law and this communication was not dealt with in
accordance with law. The failure by the Respondent No. 2 to engage with the
Appellant was therefore unlawful, being ultra vires the duties imposed by the Act
of 2017 as well as the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan under,

inter alia, Article 4 and Article 19-A.

10
(IV) That the Act of 2017 was passed to translate the fundamental right of freedom
of access to information into a meaningful and practical exercise. The aims of the
law and the aspirations behind its promulgation have been defeated by the failure
to implement its provisions, whereas it is a settled principle of jurisprudence that
Constitutional rights and benefits conferred on citizens through legislation cannot
be allowed to be defeated by inaction of the agents tasked with implementation of
the law. It is trite law that Government Agencies and public bodies are
duty-bound to implement the provisions of the Constitution as well as all other

applicable statutes and laws.

(V) That on the facts of the instant Appeal, the legal right of the Appellant has
been rendered nugatory by the failure of the Respondent No. 2 to comply with the
request of the Appellant which failure is unreasonable, unlawful and ultra vires
both the Act of 2017 and the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
under, inter alia, Article 4 and Article 19-A. As such, he is entitled to a redressal

of his Grievance and a vindication of his rights.

PRAYER

In light of all of the aforegoing, it is humbly submitted that the failure of the Respondent
No. 2 to deal with the request by the Appellant as per the Act of 2017 is an act of obstruction
that is without lawful authority, u/tra vires and hence illegal. The same is therefore also
arbitrary, capricious and completely unjustifiable in terms of The Right of Access to
Information Act, 2017. Therefore, it is humbly prayed that this Honourable Information
Commission may graciously direct the Respondent No. 2 to provide the information sought
by the Appellant without further delay, “delivered in a digital format’—as specified in the

initial request, and in accordance with The Right of Access to Information Act, 2017.

11
It is also humbly prayed that this Honourable Information Commission may also kindly

grant such other relief as it deems fit in the circumstances of the instant Appeal.

Appellant

Dated: 03.12.2019

12
Annexure A
Request Page 1

 

Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani

23 October, 2019

Public Information Officer / Designated Officer for Information Requests; or
Managing Director / Head of;

Office of the Deputy Controller

Stationery & Forms

University Road,

Karachi

9203375, 99202171

LTR/RTI/FED/9427-0

SUBJECT: REQUEST UNDER RIGHT OF ACCESS TO INFORMATION ACT,
2017 TO PROVIDE RECORDS OF THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN

Dear Designated Officer or Head of Stationary & Forms
| hope this letter finds you in the best of circumstances.

As a concerned citizen of Pakistan, under the rights granted to me by Article
19-A of the Constitution of Pakistan! and the Right of Access to Information Act,
20172, I'd like to request: a copy of all published copies of the Gazette of
Pakistan in possession of the Department of Stationery & Forms.

Please ensure that the records:

e Include all published issues in recorded history up to the present date;
e Include every issue within the department's stewardship, regardless of

which office they are in; and
e Where possible, are delivered in a digital format to save time and

delivery costs

ee EEE
} http:/Awww.pakistani.org/pakistan/constitution/part2.chi.htm!
ss http://www.na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/1506960942_594.pdf

13
 

Annexure A
Request Page 2

Please note that this letter is sufficient for a request under the Right of Access
to Information Act, 2017 and, therefore, your organization is “required to
respond to a request as soon as possible and in any case within ten working
days of receipt of the request.” This requirement has also been reaffirmed per
the precedence set by the Honorable Lahore High Court in its response to
Writ Petition 222681/2018 (Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani vs. Federation of

Pakistan).

You may send me a reply in writing to my address above, or preferably via
email to amin@qilani.me. | am also available for any clarifications to this
request that you may require.

Sincerely,

Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani

14
Annexure B

Registered Receipt with Tracking Number

 

15
Annexure B

Proof of Delivery (Screenshot of Online Tracking Result)

 

Wrz ABOUT TRACKING SHIPPING — SERVICES

WE MOVE You=

 

Bie-le me (eV metal elu

 

Enter any combination of TCS tracking Reference number (one per line).

Tracking Result(s)

 

Tracking Number : 40602360496

Shipment Details:

Agent Reference Number : NA

Origin : LAHORE

Destination : KARACHI

Booking Date ; 23-OCT-19 12:53
Shipper : SYED MUHAMMAD AMIN G
Consignee : PESIGNATED PUBLIC

 

Shipment Tracking Summary

Current Status: DELIVERED
Delivered On; 24-OCT-1915:43
Signed by ; RAZI

 

Track History:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

24-OCT-1915:43 DELIVERED. Signed by RAZ KARACHI, PAK
24-OCT-19 15:28 Courier out for delivery KARACHI, PAK
ABOUT SERVICES & SOLUTIONS MEDIA CONTACT US
VISION & CORE VALUES DOMESTIC DELIVERY PUBLICATIONS
MILESTONES WAREHOUSE & DISTRIBUTION CASE STUDIES
LEADERSHIP MAIL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
INTERNATIONAL DELIVERY SIGNUP FOR FAQs
PORTFOLIO COMPANIES TUS COOL CONTROL UPDATES
———_—_—_—— TCS TRAVEL AND VISA
SENTIMENTS TCS CARGO
OCTARA

STUDIO BY TCS

16
 

€

Annexure C

Response
ij Ay
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN
OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY CONTROLLER
STATIONERY AND FORMS

UNIVERSITY ROAD, KARACHI
F.NO.G.1/Corr/16-17 (G) Part-1 Dated: 11-11-2019
To,

Syed Muhamad Aniin Gilani,

 

Subject:- REQUEST FOR SUPPLY OF GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN.
Dear Sir,
Reference your letter dated 23 October, 2019, on the subject cited above

In this regard it is informed to you that The Department of Stationery and
forms is responsible for sale/supply of the Gazette of Pakistan to the subscribers
payment of annual subscription fee and to the General Public on payment of face
of each Gazette. You can obtain your required Gazette of Pakistan, available with this
Department, on payment of face value of each for the past period and on advance

payment annual subscription fee of Rs.9400/- for the future as per your requirement

It is requested to ascertain your requisite Gazettes, enabling this office to
furnish you a bill thereof, required Gazette will be supplied as soon as the payment of the

same received.

fo» / J

fay
(MUHAMMASS AKRAM MAST)

peceepet hepa

17
Pakistan Information Commission
Information Service Academy
Zero Point, Islamabad

   

PAKISTAN _
INFORMA
COMMISSION

Date: December 10-12-2019 Ref No: Appeal-195-12/2019

Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani,

   

Subject: Acknowledgement of the Appeal

Your appeal number mentioned above against Department of Stationary and Forms, University
Road, Karachi has been received and it is under process. Please cite this appeal number in future

correspondence.

(Zahid Abdullah)
Information Commissioner
Pakistan Information Commission
Information Service Academy
Zero Point, Islamabad

 

Date:December 19, 2019 Ref No: Appeal-195-12/19

Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani

  

Dear Appellant,

Enclosed find hearing notice sent to the Department of Stationery and Forms against your
appeal. It is not obligatory for an Appellant to attend the hearing. However, if you so desire,

you can attend the hearing yourself and/or can authorize a person to attend the hearing on
your behalf.

bdullah
Information Commissioner
Pakistan Information Commission
Information Service Academy
Zero Point, Islamabad

 

Hearing Notice

Date: December 19, 2019 Ref No: Appeal-195-12/19

Muhammad Akram Mast

Assistant Controller (Publication)
Office of the Deputy Controller
Department of Stationery and Forms
University Road

Karachi

Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani

Vs.
Department of Stationery and Forms

‘Take notice that the above cited appeal is fixed for regular hearing before the Pakistan
Information Commission on January 22, 2020at 11:30 AM at the above-mentioned address.

Find enclosed Schedule of Costs notified by Pakistan Information Commission and copy of

the Right of Access to Information Act 2017 for ready reference. You are directed to submit

reply before the date of hearing. Note: The case record in the above cited appeal, if
d before the Information Commission at the time of hearing.

   
Pakistan Information Commission
Information Service Academy
Zero Point, Islamabad

 

Appeal No 195-12/19
Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani (Appellant)
Vs.
Department of Stationery and Forms (Respondent)
ORDER

February 25, 2020

Zahid Abdullah: Information Commissioner

A. The Appeal

1. The Appellant filed an appeal with the commission on 03/12/19 in which he stated that he had
requested information from the Department of Stationery and Forms under the Right of Access
to Information Act, 2017.

3. The information sought by the Complainant, through application dated 23/10/19 Director
General, Department of Stationery and Forms is as under:

“I'd like to request: a copy of all published copies of the Gazette of Pakistan in possession of the
Department of Stationery & Forms.

Please ensure that the records:
e Include all published issues in recorded history up to the present date;

e Include every issue within the department's stewardship, regardless of which office
they are in; and

e Where possible, are delivered in a digital format to save time and delivery costs
1: www.pakistani. org/pakistan/constitution/part2. chl.html
2: http://www.na.gov. pk/uploads/documents/15 06960942_594.pdf

Please note that this letter is sufficient for a request under the Right of Access to Information
Act, 2017 and, therefore, your organization is “required to respond to a request as soon as
possible and in any case within ten working days of receipt of the request. ” This requirement has
also been reaffirmed per the precedence set by the Honorable Lahore High Court in its response
to Writ Petition 222681/2018 (Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani vs. Federation of Pakistan).

Page 1 of 4
You may send me a reply in writing to my address above, or preferably via email to
amin@gilani.me”

3. On 11/11/19, the Department of Stationery and Forms responded to the request for
information of the Appellant through a letter issued from the Office of Controller which is as
under:

“Reference your letter dated 23 October, 2019, on the subject cited above. In this regard it is
informed to you that The Department of Stationery and forms is responsible for sale/supply of
the Gazette of Pakistan to the subscribers on payment of annual subscription fee and to the
General Public on payment of face value of each Gazette. You can obtain your required Gazette
of Pakistan, available with this Department, on payment of face value of each for the past period

and on advance payment annual subscription fee of Rs.9400/- for the future as per your
requirement.

It is requested to ascertain your requisite Gazettes, enabling this office to furnish you a bill
thereof, required Gazettes will be supplied as soon as the payment of the same received”.

B. Proceedings

4. The hearing date was fixed for 22/01/2020 through the hearing notice sent on 19/12/19 and
both parties were informed accordingly.

5. The hearing notice of the commission sent to Muhammad Akram Mast, Assistant Controller
(Publication), Office of the Deputy Controler, Department of Stationery and Forms, is as under:

“Find enclosed Schedule of Costs notified by Pakistan Information Commission and copy of
the Right of Access to Information Act 2017 for ready reference. You are directed to submit
written reply before the date of hearing.

Note: The case record in the above cited appeal, if any, be produced before the Information
Commission at the time of hearing”

6. No one appeared on behalf of the Respondent at the time of hearing nor any written response
was submitted by the Respondent.

C. Discussion and Commission’s View on Relevant Issues
7. The questions for the consideration of the commission are as under:

(a) Can a public body charge its proscribed fee for providing requested information declared to
be public information the Right of Access to Information Act 2017 in the presence of Schedule
of Costs notified by the commission?

(b) Is the public body obligated to provide requested information to a citizen in the preferred
mode of receiving the requested information?

Page 2 of 4
8. A Gazette contains notifications which are public documents under Section 5 (b)! of the Act.
Furthermore, under Section 8? of the Act, all federal public bodies were legally bound to
computerize and make available online all public documents mentioned in Section 5 within 6
months of the commencement of the Act

9. Section 15% of the Act states that a public body can only charge prescribed fee for the cost of
reproducing information and sending it to the applicant. Section 27 of the Act empowers the
commission to make Regulations including prescribing fee to be charged for providing the
requested information to the applicant under this Act. A public body can only charge fee
mentioned in the ‘Schedule of Costs’ already issued by the commission under Section 27 (b) of
the Act.

10. This commission is of the view that the cost of getting access to information should not deter
citizens from exercising their right of access to information in matters of public importance. That
is why elected representatives of the people of Islamic Republic of Pakistan inserted Section -
in the Act to ensure that the citizens have prompt access to information at “the lowest and
reasonable cost”.

11. This commission notes with concern that while Section 11 (2)° the Act facilitates applicant
to file information requests in the manner of their choices, the federal public bodies have neither
taken steps to receive information requests in different modes to facilitate citizens nor taken steps
to provide them requested information promptly and in cost effective modes of their choices.

12. This commission has been entrusted with the solemn responsibility of advancing the purpose
of this Act enunciated in the Preamble® of the Act and holds that objectives mentioned in the
Preamble will oniy be achieved if the citizens have prompi and cost-effective access to
information in matters of public importance.

 

1 Statutes, statutory rules, regulations, bye-laws, orders and notifications, etc. applicable to the public body
disclosing the date of their respective commencement or effect
1. 2 Computerization and Voluntary Disclosure of record--- Each public body shall Endeavour to ensure
within the time prescribes in section 5 and that all record accessible under this Act is computerized and is
available online so that authorized access to such public records is facilitated.

2. 3 Fee for requests-- Prescribed fee may be charged for the cost of the reproducing information and
sending it to the applicant.

3. 4 Right to have access to information not be denied— (1) subject to the provisions of the Act, no applicant
shall be denied access to information or record held by the public body
(2) This Act may be interpreted so as to advance its purposes as set out in the preamble and to—
a) Promote the right of access to information; and

Facilitate and encourage promptly the disclosure of the information at the lowest and reasonable cost.
5 A request under sub-section (1) shall in writing and made in any manner in which the public body has the facilities
to receive it, including in person, by email, fax, online or e-mail.
6 Whereas Government believes in transparency and the right to have access to information to ensure that the
people of Islamic Republic of Pakistan have improved access to records held by public authorities and promote the
purpose of making the government more accountabie to its people, of improving participation by the people in
public affairs, of reducing corruption and inefficiency in Government, of promoting sound economic growth, of
promoting good governance and respect for human rights.

Page 3 of 4
13. This commission holds that the Respondent is in possession of the requested information
which it was legally bound to computerize and make accessible through online to the citizens of
Pakistan. While the Respondent may provide Gazettes to the citizens who prefer printed book
and through annual subscription, the Respondent should also make all Gazettes accessible
through online.

D. Order

14. The appeal is allowed. The Respondent is directed to provide the requested information to
the Appellant through E-mail at the earliest, but in any case, not later than 10 working days of
the receipt of this order. Furthermore, the Respondent is directed to take immediate steps to
publish all Gazettes online and submit the compliance report to the commission by 24/03/2020.

15. Copies of this order be sent to the Respondent and the Appellant for information and
necessary action.

—_———_—---
CO

Mohammad Azam
Chief Information Commissioner

Fawad Malik
Information Commissioner

 

Announced on:
February 25, 2020

This order consists of 4 (four) pages, each page has been read and signed.

Page 4 of 4

 
