Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani

   

23 October, 2019

Public Information Officer / Designated Officer for Information Requests; or
Managing Director / Head of;

Office of the Deputy Controller

Stationery & Forms

University Road,

Karachi

9203375, 99202171

LTR/RTI/FED/9427-0

SUBJECT: REQUEST UNDER RIGHT OF ACCESS TO INFORMATION ACT,
2017 TO PROVIDE RECORDS OF THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN

Dear Designated Officer or Head of Stationary & Forms
| hope this letter finds you in the best of circumstances.

As a concerned citizen of Pakistan, under the rights granted to me by Article
19-A of the Constitution of Pakistan’ and the Right of Access to Information Act,
2017’, I'd like to request: a copy of all published copies of the Gazette of
Pakistan in possession of the Department of Stationery & Forms.

Please ensure that the records:

e Include all published issues in recorded history up to the present date;

e Include every issue within the department’s stewardship, regardless of
which office they are in; and

e Where possible, are delivered in a digital format to save time and
delivery costs

 

' http://www.pakistani.org/pakistan/constitution/part2.ch1.html
? http://www.na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/1506960942_594.pdf
Please note that this letter is sufficient for a request under the Right of Access
to Information Act, 2017 and, therefore, your organization is “required to
respond to a request as soon as possible and in any case within ten working
days of receipt of the request.” This requirement has also been reaffirmed per
the precedence set by the Honorable Lahore High Court in its response to
Writ Petition 222681/2018 (Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani vs. Federation of
Pakistan).

You may send me a reply in writing to my address above, or preferably via
email to amin@gilani.me. | am also available for any clarifications to this
request that you may require.

Sincerely,

Syed Muhammad Amin Gilani

 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN
OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY CONTROLLER
STATIONERY AND FORMS
UNIVERSITY ROAD, KARACHI

F.NO.G.1/Corr/16-17 (G) Part-1 Dated: 11-11-2019

To

>

Syed Muhamad Amin Gilani,

 

Subject:- REQUEST FOR SUPPLY OF GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN.

Dear Sir,

Reference your letter dated 23 October, 2019, on the subject cited above.

In this regard it is informed to you that The Department of Stationery and
forms is responsible for sale/supply of the Gazette of Pakistan to the subscribers on
payment of annual subscription fee and to the General Public on payment of face value

“of each Gazette. You can obtain your required Gazette of Pakistan, available with this
Department, on payment of face value of each for the past period and on advance

payment annual subscription fee of Rs.9400/- for the future as per your requirement.

It is requested to ascertain your requisite Gazettes, enabling this office to
furnish you a bill thereof, required Gazette will be supplied as soon as the payment of the

same received.

/

(MUHAM MAST)

Assista: pe Re epson
